JUDY WOODRUFF: For American
children, summer is supposed
to be a time of fun and games,
but, for many, it is
also a time of true need.
During the school year,
roughly 22 million children
in this country get
free and reduced-price
lunch.
In the summer, those
numbers drop dramatically.
Just under four million have
access to subsidized meals.
There are 50,000 locations
providing summer meals, but
reaching those who need the food
can be a challenge.
Special PBS correspondent Lisa
Stark of our partner Education
Week traveled to Nebraska
to see how one food bank
is trying to fill the gap.
LISA STARK: It's a scorching
summer day in Plattsmouth,
Nebraska, about 40 minutes south
of Omaha, as the food
truck lumbers into view.
Despite the heat, families are
lining up for lunch at what's
called Kids Cruisin' Kitchen.
BECKY HAM, Parent:
They get milk.
They get fruit and vegetables.
It's really a nice program.
LISA STARK: Becky Ham and
her children rely on the food
truck a few times a week.
BECKY HAM: We started doing this
about three summers ago when
my husband lost his job right
before the end of
the school year.
And we were really panicked
about how we were going
to make everything work.
LISA STARK: Ham's husband
has a new job, but the
budget remains tight.
The family still qualifies for
free school lunches, and is
thankful for the summer help.
BECKY HAM: It's really
helping kids out.
It's really helping families
out when they need it.
LISA STARK: Kids Cruisin'
Kitchen was launched six years
ago by Omaha's Food Bank for the
Heartland and Salvation Army.
With four food trucks and
10 fixed locations, it
serves 1,300 children a day.
Do you get enough to
eat at the food truck?
CHILD: ÑMD-ULÑ They
give us a lot of meals.
LISA STARK: A lot of
meals and a lot of food?
CHILD: ÑMD-ULÑ Yes.
LISA STARK: Yes?
Susan Ogborn is the
food bank president.
Who are you trying to help?
Who's your target here
for the summer meals?
SUSAN OGBORN, President,
Food Bank for the Heartland:
Primarily, the children of the
working poor.
They are the folks who won't
tell you that they need help.
They are the folks whose
children qualify for free
or reduced price-lunches.
LISA STARK: Preparing
these meals begins early
in the morning in an
industrial kitchen run
by an Omaha area
school district.
They make meals for Kids
Cruisin' Kitchen and other
summer meal programs.
JACKIE CAMBRIDGE, Meal Service
Manager: We do about 3,000
meals a day during the summer.
LISA STARK: In less than three
hours on this morning, corn
dogs are cooked, bananas packed,
chocolate milk readied, sack
lunches bagged, chicken patties,
fruit and veggies prepped
for later in the week.
JACKIE CAMBRIDGE: It's
the five food groups.
It's grains, meat,
fruit, vegetables, milk.
LISA STARK: Meals are paid
for by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, $3.83 each, and
must meet government nutrition
standards, which are a
bit looser in the summer.
Jackie Cambridge manages
this summer meal service.
JACKIE CAMBRIDGE: There's
always a whew when we
get it out the door.
And then we just hope that
it's getting to kids in need,
and that they're enjoying it,
and we do it all
again the next day.
LISA STARK: Shortly after 9:00
a.m., the Kids Cruisin' Kitchen
truck pulls up to load its
food, hot meals to go.
The truck makes four
stops each weekday during
most of the summer break.
After that first stop
in Plattsmouth, it's
off to a public library,
followed by a public
housing project, then onto an
affordable housing development,
areas where more than half of
children quality for free
and reduced-price lunch,
although anyone is welcome.
CHILD: You got corn dogs today?
Bananas.
LISA STARK: Summer lunches
are an outgrowth of subsidized
school lunches, which expanded
in the 1960s.
NARRATOR: A good lunch provides
from a third to one-half of
the student's daily needs.
LISA STARK: As part of President
Lyndon Johnson's war on poverty.
LYNDON JOHNSON, Former President
of the United States: Children
just must not go hungry.
LISA STARK: The programs
have grown enormously.
Today, 85 percent of all
breakfasts served at schools
and 73 percent of school lunches
are subsidized by the USDA;
12 million students depend on
breakfast, 22 million on lunch.
Nationwide, nearly 20
percent of children under
age 18 live in poverty.
That's 14.5 million children.
LAURA HATCH, No Kid Hungry:
Sometimes, schools are providing
the only meals that kids get
during the week.
LISA STARK: Laura Hatch is
With No Kid Hungry, a national
advocacy group trying to reduce
childhood hunger.
She says school meals
make a big difference.
LAURA HATCH: We know that
kids that eat breakfast
do better on math tests.
We know that serving breakfast
as part of the school day can
actually keep kids in their
seat and lessen absenteeism.
LISA STARK: Serving
school meals is easier.
Students are all in one place.
Summer meals are tougher.
The food has to get to
where the children are.
To make it work, the food bank
hires 10 temporary staffers, and
relies on 200 volunteers from
Mutual of Omaha.
This is Gary Hering's
third year helping out.
He understands hunger.
GARY HERING, Volunteer: There
were times when, as a family,
I know we struggled, and we'd
go visit relatives just to eat,
you know, have food every day.
LISA STARK: Do you think that's
true for some of these kids?
Or what do you think?
GARY HERING: You bet.
That's the best part about it
today, that these kids aren't
going to be hungry at lunch.
LISA STARK: Despite all this
effort by the food bank and
others, Nebraska ranks near
the bottom of all 50 states
when it comes to summer meals.
For every 100 children
who depend on the school
lunch program, only
eight are getting help
during the summer.
That's according to the Food
Research and Action Network,
which found that, last year,
nationwide, that gap between
filling the need during the
school year and the summer got
wider.
It's especially difficult to
reach children in rural areas.
They are spread out, and USDA
rules require all summer meals
to be served and eaten in
one place at one time.
WOMAN: You guys going to
eat it over here today, OK?
LISA STARK: Regulars, like
Michelle Brown and her sisters,
are well aware of the rules.
CHILD: You just have to,
like, eat here, and you
have to come on time.
LISA STARK: USDA has a pilot
program in seven states and two
tribal areas to help families
in need during the summer
by temporarily increasing
food stamps benefits.
Advocates would like this
program offered more widely.
Agriculture Secretary Sonny
Perdue, who recently visited a
summer meal site in Washington,
D.C., says he's
open to the idea.
SONNY PERDUE, U.S. Agriculture
Secretary: I don't think
any of us want to fast over
the summer, so just because
school stops doesn't mean that
the needs for good, nutritious,
healthy food and a good
environment doesn't stop.
LISA STARK: The food bank's
Susan Ogborn is eager to see
regulations relaxed to make it
easier to expand summer meals.
SUSAN OGBORN: The problem is,
children are hungry every day.
And so we hope that Secretary
Perdue and the rest of his team
at USDA get their rules and
regulations figured
out pretty quickly.
LISA STARK: For now, the food
bank will continue to roll along
with its current program, hoping
one day to reach many more
children, but committed
to the mostly satisfied
customers it already
has.
What do you think
about the food truck?
CHILD: I like it, but I would
love it if they added donuts.
LISA STARK: Maybe next summer.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Education Week, I'm Lisa
Stark in Omaha, Nebraska.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We
love donuts, too.